README.md, before:

# isw-database
This repository contains Python scripts which enable the web scraping, databasing, and querying of publications from the [Institute of the Study of War](http://www.understandingwar.org/). Publication contents and metadata (title, publication date, etc.) are programatically parsed from ISW's website and inserted into a MongoDB document database. A Flask based API provides HTTP endpoint access for outside applications to query the database.

## Setup
Begin by cloning this repository and installing the required Python packages

```bash
# Clone this repository
git clone https://github.com/rhammell/isw-database.git

# Go into the repository
cd isw-database

# Install required modules
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

Open the `config.ini` configuration file and change the placeholder value `Your-Mongo-Connection-String` to the connection string of the MongoDB instance that will be used. 

Ex. `mongodb+srv://<user>:<password>@cluster0.mrqo0.mongodb.net/` if using a Mongo Atlas cloud database. 

```
[mongodb]
connection_string = Your-MongoDB-Connection-String
database_name = ISW
collection_name = Publications
```

The default database and collection names `ISW` and `Publicaitons` can be edited within this file. If the database and collection do not exist they will be automatically created in the configured MongoDB as documents are inserted. 


## Populating MongoDB

The `populate_db.py` script is used to scrape ISW publications and add them to the configured MongoDB. The script can be run at regular intervals to continually add the latest publication data to the database without creating duplicate entries.

By default the latest 20 ISW search pages (10 publications per page) are scraped. This number can be controlled with an optional integer number passed into the run command. 

```bash
# Run default 20 pages
python3 populate_db.py

# Run latest 10 pages
python3 populate_db.py 10
```

Each publication webpage is parsed to collect its text body and other metadata. Below is an example of the document structure for each publication added to the database. 

```python
{
    "_id": "782260080255bd77491caf3ad88282c976e54dfd", # Hash of title and date
    "title": "Iraq Situation Report: August 12-18, 2020",
    "date": "2020-08-21T17:38:31-04:00",
    "url": "http://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/iraq-situation-report-august-12-18-2020",
    "content": "Iraq Situation Report: August 12-18, 2020 | Institute for the ..."
}
```

## API Access

The `api.py` script creates a REST API that allows for querying the database through HTTP endpoints. This functionality enables other applications to access the publications data without direct connection to the database itself. 

Initialize the API server using on the default host and port `localhost:5000` with the following command

```bash
python3 api.py
```

The following endpoints are availble through the API: 

- `GET /publications`: Get a list of all publications data ordered by `date` field

- `GET /publicatins/<id>`: Get publication data of entry specified by `<id>`

- `GET /publications/latest`: Get the 10 most recent publications ordered by `date` field

- `POST /publications/search`: Get a list of publications that match a JSON formatted MongoDB query that is included in the request


### Usage

Requests to the API can be made from Python using the  `requests` module

```python
import requests
```

Get a complete list of all the publications in database by using the `/publications` endpoint. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications')

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Total number of publications
print(len(data['response']))
```

Each entry in the database has a unique ID number associated with it. This ID can be used with the `/publications/<id>` endpoint to retrieve that specific publication. The document data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Set ID
doc_id = "2d687f992b57007814d359dd5db073bc11779071"

# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications/' + doc_id)

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print title
print(data['response']['title'])
```

The `/publications/latest` endpoint allows for a quick way to retrieve a list the 10 latest publications that have been scraped. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications/latest')

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print dates
for publication in data['response']:
    print(publication['date'])
```

The `/publications/search` endpoint accepts a JSON formatted MongoDB [query](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/query-documents/) in a POST request. This allows for more complex queries that can filter for any field and returns a list of any matching documents. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON. 

```python
# Create MongoDB query to search for all documents with 'Iraq' the title
query = {"title": {'$regex' : "Iraq"}}

# Make request
r = requests.post('http://localhost:5000/publications/search', json={'query': query})

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print titles
for publication in data['response']:
    print(publication['title'])
```

Commit message:

Removed flask_pymongo and changed readme

README.md, after:

# isw-database
This repository contains Python scripts which enable the web scraping, databasing, and querying of publications from the [Institute of the Study of War](http://www.understandingwar.org/). Publication contents and metadata (title, publication date, etc.) are programatically parsed from ISW's website and inserted into a MongoDB document database. A Flask based API provides HTTP endpoint access for outside applications to query the database.

## Setup
Begin by cloning this repository and installing the required Python packages

```bash
# Clone this repository
git clone https://github.com/rhammell/isw-database.git

# Go into the repository
cd isw-database

# Install required modules
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

Open the `config.ini` configuration file and change the placeholder value `Your-Mongo-Connection-String` to the connection string of the MongoDB instance that will be used. 

Ex. `mongodb+srv://<user>:<password>@cluster0.mrqo0.mongodb.net/` if using a Mongo Atlas cloud database. 

```
[mongodb]
connection_string = Your-MongoDB-Connection-String
database_name = ISW
collection_name = Publications
```

The default database and collection names `ISW` and `Publicaitons` can be edited within this file. If the database and collection do not exist they will be automatically created in the configured MongoDB as documents are inserted. 


## Populating MongoDB

The `populate_db.py` script is used to scrape ISW publications and add them to the configured MongoDB. The script can be run at regular intervals to continually add the latest publication data to the database without creating duplicate entries.

By default the latest 20 ISW search pages (10 publications per page) are scraped. This number can be controlled with an optional integer number passed into the run command. 

```bash
# Run default 20 pages
python3 populate_db.py

# Run latest 10 pages
python3 populate_db.py 10
```

Each publication webpage is parsed to collect its text body and other metadata. Below is an example of the document structure for each publication added to the database. 

```python
{
    "_id": "782260080255bd77491caf3ad88282c976e54dfd", # Hash of title and date
    "title": "Iraq Situation Report: August 12-18, 2020",
    "date": "2020-08-21T17:38:31-04:00",
    "url": "http://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/iraq-situation-report-august-12-18-2020",
    "content": "Iraq Situation Report: August 12-18, 2020 | Institute for the ..."
}
```

## API Access

The `app.py` script creates a Flask-based REST API that allows for querying the database through HTTP endpoints. This functionality enables clients to access the publications data without direct connection to the database itself. 

Iniitialize the API using the Flask builtin server on the default host and port `localhost:5000` with the `python3 -m flask run` command. By default this server is only available to the local host it is running on. To make it accessible from external IP addresses set the `host` flag to `0.0.0.0`.

```bash
# Server available to local host only
python3 -m flask run

# Server available externally
python3 -m flask run --host=0.0.0.0
```

The following endpoints are availble through the API: 

- `GET /publications`: Get a list of all publications data ordered by `date` field

- `GET /publicatins/<id>`: Get publication data of entry specified by `<id>`

- `GET /publications/latest`: Get the 10 most recent publications ordered by `date` field

- `POST /publications/search`: Get a list of publications that match a JSON formatted MongoDB query that is included in the request


### Usage

Requests to the API can be made from Python using the  `requests` module

```python
import requests
```

Get a complete list of all the publications in database by using the `/publications` endpoint. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications')

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Total number of publications
print(len(data['response']))
```

Each entry in the database has a unique ID number associated with it. This ID can be used with the `/publications/<id>` endpoint to retrieve that specific publication. The document data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Set ID
doc_id = "2d687f992b57007814d359dd5db073bc11779071"

# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications/' + doc_id)

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print title
print(data['response']['title'])
```

The `/publications/latest` endpoint allows for a quick way to retrieve a list the 10 latest publications that have been scraped. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON.

```python
# Make GET request
r = requests.get('http://localhost:5000/publications/latest')

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print dates
for publication in data['response']:
    print(publication['date'])
```

The `/publications/search` endpoint accepts a JSON formatted MongoDB [query](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/query-documents/) in a POST request. This allows for more complex queries that can filter for any field and returns a list of any matching documents. The list data is contained in the `response` field of the returned JSON. 

```python
# Create MongoDB query to search for all documents with 'Iraq' the title
query = {"title": {'$regex' : "Iraq"}}

# Make request
r = requests.post('http://localhost:5000/publications/search', json={'query': query})

# Get JSON response
data = r.json()

# Print titles
for publication in data['response']:
    print(publication['title'])
```
